during the Second World War Hungarian
composer Bela Bartok fled to America
hoping to forge a new career but he
failed to make much impact and became
seriously ill soon after he was
diagnosed as having leukemia whilst in
hospital Bartok was visited by Serge
Koussevitzky the conductor of the Boston
Symphony Orchestra
he asked Bartok for a new work uncertain
if it would ever be written but hoping
that the advance would help cover some
of Bartok's medical expenses Bartok
threw himself at the challenge and wrote
the entire concerto for orchestra in
just 55 days it's a stunning showpiece
that requires some staggering virtuosity
from the orchestra the music is divided
into five contrasting movements rather
than the standard for finding a symphony
and it begins with a wonderfully
atmospheric phrase played by the cellos
and basses
the hidys Bartok create that ice-cold
atmosphere well in the opening phrase
the cello moves almost entirely in
fourths the opening gesture from the
cellos and basses gives way to a rather
curious signing phrase from the flutes
if we listen to the higher flute part
again notice that we're simply rising
upwards through the interval of the
fourth
so far the title concerto for orchestra
seems to be misleading because the
promise of a vibrant work isn't evident
in the opening bars so how does Bartok
plot that transition well he takes the
opening phrase and he starts to develop
it stretching it upwards like so
and finally the flute breaks free and
starts to shine as a soloist this short
solo is infused with a rhythm borrowed
from Hungarian folk music and it's by
far the easiest rhythm to spot
reappearing throughout the concerto the
flute solo finished at exactly one
minute and 38 seconds into the concerto
but how can I be so accurate
well Bartok has inscribed his score with
precise timings detailing exactly how
long each section should last
it's an incredible detail but it's also
an important milestone because by this
point Bartok has revealed his key
musical ideas soon after the orchestra
explode with the first main theme of the
movement
one of the most challenging aspects of
the concerto is that even though Bartok
was inspired by the world of folk music
he doesn't write tunes that you're gonna
go home singing this first theme of the
concerto is athletic and energetic but
it's also incredibly angular and it's
full of fourths the second movement is
entitled the game of pears it features a
series of Jewett's for wind instruments
that are linked together one after the
other in a chain light structure
Bartok brilliantly captures the
character of each instrument although he
seems to have forgotten his obsession
with fourths he's just as particular
about his harmonies as each pair of
instruments play the duet
harmonizing using just one interval so
the bassoons play 1/6 apart with that
spacing preserved for the entire duet
the obols play harmonized in the third
the clarinets the seventh and the flutes
play using a bright and clear fifth